Hi friends
In this video let us discuss about the user defined data type union.
So union is a
special data type where all the members share the same
memory location
Here we have Member1, member2 and member3
Sharing the same memory locations Union is very helpful in
embedded programming because in embedded programming the major concern
is memory
See an example
We have union example with members i of integer
type, c of character type and d of double type
The size of a union is the size of the
largest member in the union and all the other members
use the same memory location
In this example the largest member is double d which
has the size eight
Hence the size of union will also be eight
So eight bytes of memory will be allocated
The character variable c takes first byte Since size of char
is one byte and int i takes first 4
bytes and double d takes all eight bytes
Since all the variable share the same memory location only
one member can contain a value at a given time
Now let us see an example programme
Here we are declaring a union value with members
i of integer type and c of character type and
as we declare structure variable in structure
We can also declare a union variable
The syntax for declaring Union variable is keyword union
followed by union name followed by variable name followed by
semi colon
Here we have union value v
Here we have two members i and c in which i is the largest
member so four bytes or 32 bits are allocated for
the union. like structure we can access Union member using
member access operator dot So to access i, we can
use v.i and to access
c we can use v.c
So we set i=10 and we know the
binary value of 10 in 32 bit format is 28
zeros followed by 1010 which will be stored in the
allocated memory
Next we set c = a the ascii value
of a is 97 and the binary value of 97 is 1100001
which will be stored in the first 8 bits
Here
The first 8 bit memory value of i is overwritten
by the character value c.
so if we print i, it will print the
Value Stored in the whole 32 bits which is
97 not the value we stored in i
That is
We actually stored 10 in i
But when we printed i we got 97
It clearly shows that in union only one member can
contain a value at a given time
If we print the value of c the first 8
bit value will be printed in character form which is
a. now let us see another example again
We have declared union value with members integer i and
character c and we declare union variable v
now we set c = a So as
we discussed the ascii value of a is 97 it's
binary equivalent is 1100001 which will be stored
And now we set i = 100
So the binary equivalent of 100 is 1100100 will
be overwritten.
now when we print i it will print 100
And when we print c, what happens is that the
corresponding character of ascii value 100 which is d
will be printed. but we actually stored a in c
But since union can store only one member at a time
it was overwritten by i. now when should we use the
union? When we are not sure about which data type
is coming at some point in time that is the
data can be either integer or character or floating
point or double
We need to declare 4 separate variables to handle the
single value
If we declare four separate variables
It will consume 17 bytes of memory. instead if
we use union the largest member is double so it
will only take 8 bytes
We can save nine bytes and it is a programmer's
responsibility to track which variable is currently holding the value
so that we can declare a type variable to track
which variable is currently holding value
We can put all these data into a structure Here
u is a union variable and s is the structure
variable Here the largest member is double d
So eight bytes of memory will be allocated.
Double d will share the whole 8 byte memory. int i
float f will be sharing four bytes of memory
char c will share one byte of memory and the structure
variable type and four bytes of padding will be allocated
like this
We can use enum to identify the type. we
have enum of int, char, float, double
enum will assign 0 to int, 1 to char
2 to float and 3 to double
Now if we want to store an integer value we
can set s.type equal to int and to
set
i=10
use structure variable s.union variable u.integer variable i=10
So zero will be stored in type and 10 will
be stored in first 4 bytes and using if else
we can print the appropriate types value
Now if we want to store a character value set
s.type equal to char and
s.u.c = a.  again using if else
we can print the types value
So that's all and thank you for watching this video